# 137. Single Number II

| 题目 | 难度 |
| ---- | ---- |
| [137. Single Number II](https://leetcode.com/problems/single-number-ii/) | Medium |

## 题意

给一串整数，有一个数字出现了一次，另外的所有的数字出现了三次，求那个只出现了一次的整数，要求线性时间常数空间。

## 分析

这一看就是位运算的题，但怎样构建这个位运算式子是个大问题。

## 题解1

### 思路

见说明。

### 代码

```python
class Solution:
    def singleNumber(self, nums: List[int]) -> int:
        seen_once = seen_twice = 0
        
        for num in nums:
            seen_once = ~seen_twice & (seen_once ^ num)
            seen_twice = ~seen_once & (seen_twice ^ num)

        return seen_once
```

### 说明

以下内容摘录自LC官方答案下的讨论区，作者[hello_world_cn](https://leetcode.com/hello_world_cn/)。

> My explanation for Approach 3: Bitwise Operators : NOT, AND and XOR:
> 
> There are 3 key parts:
> 
> 1. Split each original number into a group of numbers, which are the power of 2. E.g., `5 = 1+4; 7=1+2+4; 8=8`
> 2. Each number after splitting is the power of 2, such as `1,2,4,8,16 ...`. Use two hash maps to save them.
>     1. If this is the first time we see a number, save it in `hash-map-once`.
>     2. If a number has already been saved in `hash-map-once`, it means this is the second time we see it. Remove it from `hash-map-once` and save it in `hash-map-twice`.
>     3. If a number has already been in `hash-map-twice`, it means this is the third time we see it. Remove it from `hash-map-twice` and we are done with it. This number has been removed from both hash maps.
>     4. After processing all numbers, `hash-map-once` only contains the group of power-of-two numbers splitted from the single orgininal number. `hash-map-twice` is 0. We could simply collect all numbers in `hash-map-once` and add them together to get the single original number.
> 3. [Optimization] Because all numbers after splitting are the power of 2, such as 1,2,4,8,16, etc., we assume there are at most 32 types of numbers after splitting. We could save memory by squashing the two hash maps into two 32-bit integers. Each power-of-2 number could be represented by 1 bit in the 32-bit integer.
>     - `hash-map-once` -> `seenOnce`
>     - `hash-map-twice` -> `seenTwice`
>     - After processing all numbers, the value of integer `seenOnce` is exactly the sum of all numbers left in `hash-map-once`.
> 
> Further thoughts:
>
> It is not necessary to replace the two hash-maps with two 32-bit integers. If we simply use 1 hash-map to save the occurrences of all power-of-2 numbers, the size of the hash-map is at max 32. We can still consider it as a constant memory space solution and the space complexity is still O(0). With the hash map, we could easily extend the problem to n duplicated numbers. E.g., All numbers are duplicated 100 times except 1. Find out this single number.

### 评估

| 时间复杂度 | 空间复杂度 |
| ---- | ---- |
| O(n) | O(1) |

| | 运行时间 | 内存占用 |
| ---- | ---- | ---- |
| 数值 | 52ms | 15.7MB |
| 排名 | 93.35% | 82.68% |

## 总结

不常考，就当见识一下。
